---
Title: Review of heat pump use and performance
Date: 2024-07-27
Category: non-technical
Tags: sustainability
Summary: A review of one year's worth of data from my home heat pump.
Status: published
---

{% import 'post-macros.html' as macros %}

I had a heat pump installed in my house in July 2022, and a year later a
[Vaillant gateway][gateway], which provides monitoring and logging services
via a 'myVaillant' smartphone app. Since I now have a year's worth of data,
this note reviews what has been logged to see how the system is performing.

[gateway]: https://www.vaillant.co.uk/product-systems/smart-controls/myvaillant-connect-internet-gateway

{{ macros.image('heat-pump/heat-pump.jpg') }}

The heatpump is a 10 kW Vaillant Arotherm plus (pictured above), serving my
house of approximately 90 square meters internal area. I have previously posted
about the building's [energy efficiency](home-thermal-imaging-survey.html) and
[additional first floor insulation](cornish-unit-house-retrofit-insulation.html) added.
This pump's capacity the current requirements of the house, but we are planning
an extension in the near future. In terms of the operation of the heat pump, heating
is set to run consinuously with a fixed temperature of 19 degrees C is set in the
downstairs hallway, and hot water is fixed and continuous at 50 degrees C.

The myVaillant app usefully provides a button to download all logged data per
year in a set of CSV files. I have summarised the year period from July 2023 to
July 2024 in the following charts. Having read this [review][pfb-vaillant-app]
of the myVaillant app, I am aware that there may be accuracy/quantization
issues. The review measured a ~10% error in electricity consumed and a ~20% error
in the heat energy produced, as well as pointing out many logged values are a multiple of
1000 Wh, which I also observe. Unlike the review, with no other means of measuring
the metrics, I don't have a point of comparison. Hopefully since the review Vaillant
have improved the reported measurements.

The first chart shows the consumption of electrical energy for heating (red)
and hot water (blue). Most obviously, electricity consumption during the winter
months rockets when the heat pump is using around 10 kWh per day. There are two
spikes in November and Janurary where temperatures went below zero, with
consumption going up close to 30 kWh per day. As expected, hot water is more
consistent thoughout the year with an increase through the winter months. The
total electrical energy for heating for the year is 1.35 MWh and 1.04 MWh for
hot water.

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/consumed.png',
                       caption="Electrical energy consumed in kWh.") }}

The short periods where both drop to zero are due either to a holiday and the
system being in 'absence' mode or a technical issue. Regarding the latter, these
have only been due to a loss of pressure in the system, requiring a manual topup
from the mains.

The next chart is the heat energy generated and the one after is the ratio
between generated and consumed, or the coefficient of performance (COP).

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/generated.png',
                       caption="Heat energy generated (hot water and heating) in kWh.") }}

The average COP in this period is 3.3. The Vaillant app reports 3.4, which may
be taking into account the quiescent periods, which broadly means the system is functioning well.
However, caution is [again advised][pfb-cop] because of the inaccuracies in the Vaillant data.

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/COP.png',
                       caption="COP calculated by dividing heat generated by electrical energy consumed.") }}

The following chart shows the temperature of the contents of the hot water tank. As expected,
this stays constant, with a few execptions: when I changed the temperature from 45 to 50 degrees C,
when the system has been off or out of order and when every week on a Monday the immersion heater kicks
in to perform a Legionella purge.

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/water-temperature.png',
                       caption="Hot water temperature in degrees celcius.") }}

My favourite chart is internal vs external temperature in degrees C.

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/internal-external-temperature.png',
                       caption="Internal and external temperatures in degrees celcius.") }}

{{ macros.imagenothumb('heat-pump/Grafana-Octopus-electricity-use.png',
                       caption="Electricity use from Octopus data.") }}

[pfb-vaillant-app]: https://protonsforbreakfast.wordpress.com/2023/02/06/the-myvaillant-app-a-review
[pfb-vaillant-arotherm]: https://protonsforbreakfast.wordpress.com/2022/10/19/vaillant-arotherm-plus-heat-pump-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly
[pfb-cop]: https://protonsforbreakfast.wordpress.com/2024/03/13/can-i-believe-my-vaillant-heat-pump-cop

## References and further reading

- [Protons for Breakfast, articles about heat
  pumps](https://protonsforbreakfast.wordpress.com/heat-pump-articles/) is a
  fantasitic set of articles by physicist Michael de Podesta.
- [Energy Stats](https://energy-stats.uk) provides pricing data for various
  Octopus Energy tarrifs.
- [Guy Lipman's Octopus Energy resources](https://www.guylipman.com/octopus) is
  a collection of notes focusing on using the Octopus API to access energy
  data.
- [Octopus Energy API](https://octopus.energy/blog/agile-smart-home-diy) is the
  landing page for using their API.
- [Octograph (Github)](https://github.com/Yanson/octograph) A Python tool for
  extracting Octopus Energy meter readings to InfluxDB and Grafana.
